five four three
hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day
I love rockets if you've been around
this channel you know that about me and
today is like the best day ever because
we're gonna learn how to build rockets
just down the road from Huntsville
Alabama there's a city named Decatur and
in that city there is a rocket factory
owned by a company called United Launch
Alliance and that Factory has been
cranking out incredibly reliable Rockets
for years because these orbital Rockets
have some of the same technologies in
them as ballistic missiles the knowledge
about how to build them is protected in
the United States we have a set of
regulations called ITAR international
traffic and arms regulations because of
ITAR nobody's gonna let you walk into a
rocket plant with a camera and film
things they can't risk that stuff
getting out and breaking law so there
has to be an incredible amount of trust
between the parties that want to film
things and the people that own the plant
thankfully I was given the opportunity
to build that trust with ula when I went
and watched the launch of the Parker
Solar Probe and I met the CEO of ula on
the launchpad if you haven't heard of
this guy Torre Bruno then you're in for
a treat
he's a legitimate rocket scientist who
knows his stuff inside and out it was at
this launch that Torre and I built trust
with each other like this guy is the
real deal the tour we're about to go on
has never been done on the Internet
Torre literally takes us right up to the
line of what he can show us and all
along the way he's answering my
technical questions and he's letting me
explore the factory so here we go let's
take the first-ever online tour of the
United Launch Alliance rocket Factory in
Decatur Alabama with the CEO of ula Tory
Bruno okay we've got Tory miked up now
and you're gonna show me the rockets
that are what we have here okay so we've
got an Atlas 5 on the side this is kind
of our workhorse and it's in the five
meter payload fairing configuration so
that's what we're talking about here it
also has its SRBs on the side which is
sort of its maximum lift version when
it's got all five of those we call it
the beast and this is the delta 4 heavy
and this is what you you look thank you
again yeah force through letting me
participate or at least see the
Parker Solar Probe lunch that was fun
huh let's fabricate here indicator yes
yeah so 3/4 akut you know literally
three Rockets kind of bolted together
and it is our largest rocket it's
physically the largest rocket in the
world right now and then is what we use
for Parker Solar Probe and this is what
I want to talk about this is and this
rocket has never flown never flown that
yet and you're gonna see the first
flight vehicle hardware in the factory
being fabricated when we go in there
today today yeah okay so this is our
brand new rocket you can think of it as
kind of a derivative of those two in a
way so it'll be large five point four
meter diameter so a little bit bigger
than Delta it can take six SRBs it's a
huge cavernous payload volume for the
spacecraft and this rocket has 30% more
lift capability than this big three core
monster
so when you say six SRBs be six of them
and that's just together the Earth's
gravity well right exactly
I guess exact let's go see it okay we're
at a rocket Factory let's do that we're
gonna peel off to the right here okay
yeah so this is a barrel section from
the booster over your head actually from
an atlas and I'm gonna walk you down to
the end of the factory where this first
gets made it's the first thing we do
kind of raw stock comes in the back door
gets a machine puts this curve in it and
then we'll walk you all the way through
to a completed version that's awesome
okay so there's something unique about
the North Alabama area here correct me
if I'm wrong but there's a little
triangle there's a nuclear power station
there's a steel mill yes and there's
also a rocket factory like in a triangle
that's I mean you get a river running
between them yep and so you can bring in
steel you can make a rocket using the
power from the nuclear plant yes is that
why you're here that's part of why we're
here but it's also because of the talent
that we have here with the University of
Alabama and the other
Alabama universities and the technician
programs they have here you just get an
awesome workforce and with the river
which is only a mile from here down Red
Hat Road we have the dock for our rocket
ship so we can transport our Rockets out
to the launch pad this is the rocket
ship Tory's talking about you see sets
it right on the side rocket ship rocket
ship navigates its way through several
rivers up to the Mississippi River
down to the Gulf of Mexico and then it
heads to whatever pad the Rockets will
launch from fact you should come back
sometime and do the show yeah okay we're
getting on a golf cart and we have to
cut cameras because we're gonna pass not
secret stuff but things we can't film
right right okay
cut the camera off okay we're on the
golf cart and I've obtained permission
to film straight up so you can't see
that which is pretty neat okay so I
can't talk about that right now can i no
we can't show it to you but I can tell
you what it is that's a delta payload
fairing so one of the smaller versions
of the deltas payload fairing and then
you're passing by a heat shield here
that would protect the rs-68 engine from
its own plume during flight okay this is
almost emotional I mean you you know
what it's like to sit in class and study
this stuff and then because you went to
Cal Poly right right yeah so this is me
looking at all the stuff I've learned
about and finally getting to see it it's
one thing to see it on the pad but it's
almost like a holy experience yeah well
you're inside which I'm actually
happening all getting put together okay
it's starting to get the smell of the
machine shop the manufacturing the the
cooling oil yep smell it's my
understanding you're about to show me
how to build a rocket from scratch yes
okay excellent so we're going to the
door right yes we are okay this is what
I wanted to see here at ula this is the
door I can't even get it's a wide angle
and so that's the door where the
material comes in right that's where the
Rob aluminum plate and other materials
come in and then that this is the
receiving area and as they move that way
they turn into a rocket so we're about
to build a rocket by going that way in
the plan exactly okay I'm game let's do
this all right let's do it and this is
an active manufacturing facility so
you're just gonna have to deal with the
audio there's a lot of tools going on
our air yeah sorry about that yeah you
know building rockets it's good oh wow
that is that is really can I go touch
that yeah yeah absolutely this is a very
very expensive piece that's is that
aluminum or stainless that's aluminum
aluminum yeah and is that fabricated
here locally that's indoor we but yes so
we buy that from a supplier okay and
then it's shipped here comes in through
the big
and then we machine it down we're going
to
pulled more than two-thirds of the
material while retaining about 90% of
the strength in certain dimensions right
I will show you that yeah okay got it so
this is our raw material
we're gonna we're gonna go make a rocket
okay all right and so all this is a
moment of Dennis eight all this is
aluminum that's a unique dimension you
normally don't see plates of aluminum
that wide and that long no so we this is
actually made especially for us in these
dimensions so that we can turn them into
the barrel the propellant tanks of the
rocket itself okay so so you you're
tooling up an entire boundary of some
type or a mill a rolling mill or rolling
mill okay
touch it so I'm going to show you a
couple of different things before we get
to the machine so starting here with the
Rostock of 7000 series aluminum it'll
eventually become a round rocket barrel
this is just after machining and I
wanted to point this out to you because
this is our old style of grid that we
machine in
called an ISO grid and you're familiar
with what an ISO grace yes right so we
have isentropic properties when we do
the stress analysis and you can see the
triangular patterns in there that's not
actually the ideal pattern for a rocket
barrel but it is what the analytical
tools the finite element analysis tools
available to us when we designed Atlas
and Delta in the 90s were available to
us and that's why we have that better
Vulcan will be better because the tools
are better and you'll see the difference
when we walk down the line I I have
never thought about that
so literally because in the 90s the FAA
analysis could solve a triangle easily
yes that's why the ISO grid is a
triangle I would have never thought that
so so basically if I understand
correctly can I touch this yeah I'm
going to ask you that every time so
basically because you can compute the
force coming in one member to a node and
the forces coming out the other member
that's how you get arrived at ISO grid
exactly
okay that's
yeah it's it's sort of an interesting
thing and in the real world how the
engineering tools that are available
dictate the kind of designs that we use
got it what's your safety factor on
flying here oh so it you know it depends
on what part of the rocket we're talking
about anything that would be pressurized
when people around it has a higher
safety factor than what is not but the
basic factors we work with in flight or
anywhere from one point one to never
really higher than one point two five
got it yes I mean it's very different
than like designing a railroad car where
your factor of safety might be seven or
eight oh no yeah and a factor of safety
is if you can compute the stress that
the thing will break at you design it to
one point one times that right ten
percent more load carrying capability
and really a factor of safety is really
a factor of ignorance you have a factor
of safety because you're not truly sure
what might happen to it in the field so
you give yourself just a little bit more
and you talked about rail big tractors
or another one we have big factors of
take do you like seven times twelve
times when we do Rockets we like to keep
it closer to like just 10% maybe 20%
because we can't afford the weight got
it because because every extra
thousandth of an inch that you put in
this webbing here
over the course of a huge part like this
you're talking tons on the whole rock
yes okay exactly and this is a booster
plate and so every seven pounds of that
costs me a pound of spacecraft so how
long does it take some machine that you
have the tools here to machine this ISO
grip yeah this is about a two day
operation all together is this curl like
a potato chip in this direction or in
this direction in the long direction in
the long direction and you're going to
see that operation is nice to the other
end okay perfect that's what the 25-ton
brake presses are for yeah because if
you're if you're curling along the long
direction you require a tremendous
amount of force and you have to have
alignment to keep it straight during the
bed exactly okay is that a pressure
vessel I mean with that hole pressure
would there be a liner on the inside it
is a pressure vessel but actually on the
booster because it's liquid propellant
most of the pressure is at the bottom
just coming from hydraulic head we only
have a few psi of gas on top to keep the
propellant down
against the outlet feeding it in
got it this is not something I expected
to see these guys are they appear to be
putting they washing what are they doing
they are so the first thing that happens
to those big plates is we plane them we
make them plant and so these guys are
going over an operation that's just been
done they're cleaning it up they're
looking for any imperfections and what
you're going to see in the factory that
I think is really cool you know we're
building rockets sort of the pinnacle of
technology and you're going to see
high-tech robotic operations but mixed
in you're going to also see
craftsmanship with people who are very
skilled and have great attention to
detail like these guys they're going to
go over every inch of that thing then
make sure that the automated machine
that planed it didn't leave any features
we don't want so if like a piece of the
tool broke or something like zactly chat
or whatever yeah so these are fly
cutters here yep basically and mills
some of them are side mills but yes
gotcha
am I allowed to look at this fly cutter
yeah yeah go ahead sure
isn't that cool I love machining it's
it's a secret passion of mine yeah me
too so you went to Alabama I did so do
you guys do a lot of sort of machine
stuff timing
not a whole lot but we we do take a
class or two for my undergrad I did that
but my dad had an old lathe and mill in
the garage when I was growing up yeah
that's cool stuff the other thing I'll
share with you you can see all that flow
down there we actually recover all of
these chips so even though we're going
to take the majority of the material
away by the cleaning it off subtractive
manufacturing
we capture all of it we sent it right
back to the supplier and it comes back
to us in a plate you know
is that cool that's cool input it's
mostly water
capturing the chips that's a tremendous
amount of water flow
yeah well chips are heavy
it's hard to get in scale
it's hard to get a scale for that but
that is a lot of fluid oh there's a
whole river of coolant there yeah and
are you looking for places where the
tolling broke
maybe I don't really have plus minus
five miles
right so
a small gym outside of the college right
thank you very much my name is Dustin
Jeff nice to meet you jasmine the human
stories was really cool to me it's
amazing
me too here's one that I think this
guy's actually running
so you can see way down there where the
cutting head is these are actually the
place for Vulcan flight
I can bulk them that'll go you know we
ought to do is we got it like
you'll have it
nice to go to hot pocket yeah okay I'm
gonna start be careful I did I will be
careful
nothing to see here
there you go
there's your chip guard it with your
life
all right
we're in trouble don't tell anybody -
Tori Bruno's it was okay if I stick a
chip in my pocket so these machines are
cnc correct yes okay and are these
specially made machine or these because
usually you don't plane a surface that
wide no generally when you're in this
kind of factory you're gonna see tooling
that comes from big tooling
manufacturers but it has been designed
especially for this application so all
of this is custom stuff really so for
example the head here is probably normal
but the the waves on the machine this is
incredibly long for a mill yes exactly
very very long and very large dr. very
you know big width that lets us do more
than one plate at the time so if one of
these machines go down what does that do
to you that would be a big impact but
fortunately we have more than one so we
would always still have the other
machines running so what would happen is
we'd get it fixed and then we would
catch up on an option because I I've
kept up with your launch record and you
always meet scheduled is it because you
have redundancy built into this part of
the process that is part of it so yes
this Factory was actually built with the
idea in mind
forty Rockets a year
so we have so much capacity it's easy
for us to kind of make up for a little
Channel and just like that along the way
this nowadays you fly maybe twelve or
fifth times fifteen times a year times
right okay so you're not at capacity no
not even close what you want to be this
is a commercial yeah okay so that moment
right there where Tori Bruno is joking
about the capacity of his rocket plant
it reminds me of a very specific moment
in an audio book I love called seven
Eve's now the beautiful thing about
smarter every day being sponsored by
audible is I can use moments like that
to go to Nashville and introduce you to
someone I've been wanting to meet for a
really long time okay so we're to drive
a couple hours away and we're gonna meet
a lady named Mary Robinette Kowal she
was the narrator for 70s by Neal
Stephenson and she did an amazing job
listen to the first line of the book and
for no apparent reason let's go talk to
mary robinette about this book what a
cool place to meet someone for the first
time I'm destiny didn't alright you did
okay okay this is Mary Robinette Kowal
he was an amazing narrator of audiobooks
you are I've spent like well over 12
hours with you mostly an attractor but
that's another story but the book that I
want to tell people about is called
seven Eve's by Neal Stephenson and this
looks like it was a challenging book to
narrate it was more than a little bit
challenging it's technically completely
accurate it's got this huge
international cast so basically
something hits the moon they never
figure out what it is shatter is it and
that causes them to have to get off the
planet real darn fast because the pieces
of the moon are gonna start raiding down
and causing destruction for 5,000 years
mass destruction this is what I wanted
to do it on this video because Tory
Bruno is talking about building more
rockets but you've also written a book
yourself you've written many books but
there's one in particular that's similar
to seven eight the calculating stars
yeah I slamming asteroid into Washington
DC in 1952 which kicks off the space
program fast also building a lot of
rockets a lot of right there you go so
go get one of these two books she's kind
of downplaying that a little bit you've
won the Hugo Award the locus Award and
nebula that is correct for that book
that's a big deal to win all three
get her books audible.com slash smarter
or text the word smarter to 500 500
which one would you recommend 7 years 7
Eve's I'm gonna recommend your book even
though I haven't read it
I'm guessing it's gonna be amazing it's
called the calculating stars the
calculating stars ok that's it let's go
back and build more Rockets with Tory
Bruno here we go yes if anybody needs
their own personal rocket Tory's your
guy oh yeah just let me know so you
remember we were looking at ISO grids
down there and we're looking at those
delta panels so if you look at this
panel that's being machined you can see
that they're rectangles so this is an
ortho grid
which is not symmetric but we're able to
do that now because the engineering
analysis tools are better and so Vulcan
switches to ortho grid it takes about
half the
and these panels will actually be
stronger so as I look along the ortho
grid here so you're going to break it
along the long side so this is going to
be a really long skinny potato chip
looking thing exactly so what happens
when you're breaking along that line
because you have a section in the middle
of the webbing that's going to have the
most stress yes but along the
longitudinal webbing you're gonna have
it's going to be difficult there so
actually the way the break process works
is we'll bring it in flat and as we
break it we're moving just a small
amount of material each time and we roll
the part in and out so the amount of
strain and work hardening that we get is
actually very beautiful in the process
okay but but the issue that you brought
up is one of the reasons why that's done
by people it's a hand operation
so there's no CNC on the
and the curving of the brake press it's
all craftsmanship really that's amazing
so so these are Vulcan yes these are
Vulcan panels these panels are going to
space Wow it's gonna it's kind of
lubricant on it it feels like from the
machining got it and so and so the ortho
grid just just looking at it the webbing
looks thinner so it looks like it's much
more lightweight it is yes are you
allowed to tell me a percentage I can't
give you the number yet okay ask me next
year okay I'll do that but it is
absolutely lighter weight and stronger
than the old iso grid design and it
takes half as long to me
why does it take less time to make you
can see how much simpler that pattern is
so the CMU CNC machine has more straight
runs in a simpler pattern
it's that much much faster the machine
so those are those are fancy space
sawhorses yeah these are the panels that
have been machined
they're getting ready to go into these
25-ton brake presses bump presses and
murdered potato chip them up into a
curve okay
those presses right there those presses
right there okay that's so I'm noticing
that there's no hydraulic pressure in
the center of the press there's just a
really right it's a strong back it's a
strong back
what is the technical term for it strong
back is it really yeah okay so so can I
look at this and then look at that
absolutely okay am I allowed to walk
over there yeah so you can see that
these guys actually have a little bit of
curvature along their length we're gonna
actually take that out that helps us
form the curvature along this axis more
evenly so it's sort of an intermediate
manufacturing step if you will is it is
it done on purpose or it's done oh it's
really it is done on purpose okay
of course this is again I saw grid ISO
grip got it so this is Atlas five right
okay so at some point you have internal
stresses in the material yes how do you
have an oven here to anneal no we let
them we let them are what's called
artificial aging of aluminum so
7000-series will do that so we're gonna
put a certain amount of work hardening
in here and we like that we actually
like the properties that gives us and
then what the sort of room temperature
artificial aging does is even that out
for us so we're entering the space of I
noticed you're saying hello to everyone
people know you don't they yeah oh yeah
yeah it's cool so we're entering the
area where we've got this tooling here
that's holding this stuff if these are
the guy though they're actually doing
something now yeah so that's a you know
that's a skirt and they have just
manufactured it just put the curve into
it
we can walk over there will let them
finish what they're doing we talked to
them if you like okay
yeah and great this is a finished part
here yes s Logan Vulcan flight hardware
right here it takes five of these to
make a complete barrel
you know a methane tank
and then another five on top of that
will be the liquid oxygen tank and we're
going to show you friction stir welding
which is how these are joined gotcha
alright so here is our 225 ton bump
presses so this big beam in the center
is very very stiff that's why it's so
tall because the hydraulics are on the
edges and what the technicians are going
to do our craftsmen are going to take
one of these big flat panels on these
roller carts then they literally have
patterns that are preformed that we've
made and they're going to roll them in
and out and have that knife edge come
down and hit it and slowly potato chip
it up while they're matching it to the
physical pattern until they have it just
right and so we saw this high-tech
computer-controlled machining down there
now this is pure craftsmanship where
they're going to do it by eye and by
pattern and achieve very tight
tolerances in doing so do you do you
have any plans to computer control this
in the future no this is a process that
you will always get better results doing
it by hand that's amazing so oh I didn't
even think about having to hold the
material as it comes out exactly yeah
let's walk down and you'll see one
they're working on that one right there
that's a skirt which is why it's short
hey guys
so so one question I have tori is as
they lift the part obviously it's being
supported by the top it's going to
deflect yes so how do they know if they
know it's pressing now yeah so you can
watch
now they're lifting in a little bit
he's pumping it again
so now they're making another adjustment
and they're gonna bump it again this is
all done by eye and by hand you could do
this with a sort of a remote-controlled
operation but you could not get the same
light weight tanks out of that you'd
have to work with much thicker pieces of
metal and you wouldn't have as
higher-performing rocket so I notice
she's looking with her eyes she's
operating is she operating the press
with her foot yes
she's operating the overhead crane yes
and also that she has what's called a
walk along or a creeper just like you
would have say on your truck to tighten
the fence or to get herself out of a
ditch she's doing all three things at
once while watching the curvature she's
creating in this part she is fully
engaged oh yes that's amazing
don't look at that still less
distracting should we go away we're
distracting yes yeah let's go let's go
let's go yeah we don't want to have the
Destin and Tori discrepancy report on
yeah and here is finished product and
this is all for Atlas as you can tell by
seeing the ISO grid and then we're gonna
walk down the aisle and we're gonna show
you how these get joined together into a
- oh I almost forgot
we got a good yeah we want to go to chem
processing right oh yeah
system anodized yes yeah yeah okay so
now we're in one of the world's largest
plating facilities or chemical
processing facilities where we're going
to etch the panels down so we have a
very consistent high quality known
surface and then we'll anodized them
which is plating to create a very thick
oxide layer to give the aluminum
corrosion resistance in a little bit of
hardness oh that is a very specific tool
there yes it is hold that part you know
all this destin but this is sort of
classic bare aluminum and it
automatically forms its own oxide layer
right away which is why it's sort of
white in color but we don't get very
good corrosion resistance naturally
especially from a 7000 series aluminum
because it's not very thick and it tends
to be porous and so that's why we
anodized it that's bad for fatigue right
yes okay yes very bad so we can get a
phenomenon called stress corrosion
cracking for example if we allow
corrosion to be present in these kinds
of materials so is this the chemical
milling process before you anodized
no that will all happen inside the
booths we're going to take you to this
is really for cleaning because we're
gonna you know there's a lot of
machining activity there's a lot of
chemicals that are going to be involved
and so we like to have a known condition
when it goes in and out of the tanks
then this particular dome is in here
look at that dude look at that yeah so
what about looking at so you're looking
at us rinsing and washing a ring before
it comes further down into this booth
which is actually an inspection booth
gotcha so this is pre anodization
yes so just to connect the parts we made
the part down there we hold it up on
this crane right hold it over here ride
it over there and inspect it one more
time we're gonna take it down there and
clean it we're gonna inspect it and then
we're gonna go around where you can't
see right now in anodize it we're gonna
drop it off to the other side and then
when it's all done it'll come down the
other side
gotcha so this is like the rainbow arc
of anodization yes in the oil okay cool
so Shannon whoosh what's your role here
so I work on the Commercial Crew
hardware okay I'm the production
engineering group so I work with a
design team and the technicians to
interpret the drawings and make sure
they're building it correctly because of
all the procedures and processes that
they need what kind of engineer are you
so I'm in the production engineering
group so I've made about your hair
how's it going
that's the thinking about working at ula
you never know when the CEO is gonna
walk in on you cleaning the floor so you
said sulfuric acid to do the etching yes
and and that's part of the plating so
anodization always uses typically 1a3
acids use sulfuric use chromic acid or
other organic acids so that's part of it
because that releases the oxygen in the
bath that ends some of it bubbles off
but the rest of it ends up attaching to
the material creating that corrosion
resistant layer so this is a VAT that
you would dip the part into yes in fact
here we are
here's our sulfuric acid animation so
there's a part in there right now it's
going to sit there for a prescribed
amount of time it's heated and then
we're passing current through it because
ultimately this is true is actually a
plating process see here's our D I cap
water rinse we were talking about so you
literally put the part in there and you
give it a shower give it a shower that's
awesome that's that's intimidating yeah
well plate will rinse we'll play it
again we'll clean then it goes out where
you were before for inspection here's
what they look like when they come out
so you can see that sort of
characteristic green bronze color of an
anodized aluminum surface and as the
naturally aged will become more and more
bronze so when you see an Atlas rocket
on the pad when you look at the booster
it has that very distinctive bronze
color this is why because what we just
looked at here maybe will just let you
peek over the inch would you like to
take happy great
so at this point we finished plating
cleaning and inspecting and here are the
panels lowered down from where we took
that last shot and now what now they're
going to get friction-stir welded
together into barrels forming the body
of the rocket and the propellant tanks
so one question I have about this next
step is when you weld something usually
you tack tack it together all around the
perimeter before you do the final
welding because the heat will draw it up
right so how do you account for that
here so we fixture it we hold it in
place mechanically because the
interesting thing and the reason you
want to do a friction stir welding is
because you don't melt any material
conventional welding you bring the parts
together and then as you say you tack
them to hold them and then you fill in
that gap with filler material that
you've melted that fuses to the parent
material melting it a little bit too and
then you get a heat affected zone and
that entire weld joint has different
mechanical properties than the original
material but when you friction-stir weld
you never melt anything you bring the
parts tightly together and you bring a
head that spins and literally stirs the
material together as it moves that gives
you a stronger joint which means you can
thin down the entire part and get a much
lighter weight higher performance
structure so what is the head made out
of that can withstand the temperatures
so the heads are always made out of tool
steel high-strength materials that can
stand that over and over and over we're
welding aluminum so we just need that
difference so the melting point of
aluminum is so much lower than the head
yes it's all part or we're never quite
melts it gets warm it gets a little soft
because of the heat generated through
the friction but we never actually erase
all of its mechanical properties like
you do with a classic conventional you
know fusion welding you
melt the material and I'm not allowed to
film this and I'm and I'm not allowed to
film that what if I peek over there can
I pick you to compete peek peek over
there but it was blocked out so people
couldn't see that it's so now those big
plates that you saw machined and you saw
bent and you saw anodized have to get
friction-stir welded together into a
barrel to form an Atlas booster or in
the case of which you see over there
right now is the Vulcan first flight
liquid oxygen tent that's it okay so
that that is the first vertical Assembly
of Vulcan right and so that tank will go
to space and it will lift the Astrobotic
Peregrine Lander back to the moon which
is our first mission on Vulcan really
yeah I didn't know you had a lunar
mission yeah yeah that's our first
mission that's awesome yeah it's so cool
we're really excited about that
yeah so what you're seeing here is five
these are actually Atlas but for the
version that's smokin five of those big
panels that start out flat and thick
machine down there fixtured up in there
and if you look right there you can see
that sort of bright aluminum stripe that
runs up it that is a completed friction
stir well and you have a rotary stage at
the bottom that's turning it and so you
have the weld and what I'm going to do
one two three it takes five of those
panels to make a Vulcan so we got to do
five we got to do all of those welds so
I'll rotate it and we'll do another one
rotate it do another one and over there
is a finished Atlas barrel if you'd like
to kind of see where we excite these are
friction spirits
so this is an Atlas tank and by the way
you can maybe it's a little hard to see
from down the ground but this is a lot
smaller than that big boost over there
right and so here's our classic ISIL
grid what sir what's our diameter on
Atlas so Atlas is a little bit closer to
like 3.8 meters and this is a five point
four meter diameter rocket on Vulcan got
it so even just a little bit bigger than
Delta that's a lot more volume table and
oh yeah yeah so r-squared you know the
math yeah so like it's better to order
one large pizza than two medium pizzas
that's right so when you have a large
rocket you get more than just two small
Rockets you got it that's the easiest
way to say that okay so this is a
friction so here's a friction stir world
so you can feel that
[Music]
yeah you can feel where it heat it up
and grew a little bit yeah we just bring
these parts tightly together we bring a
head down that spins very very fast it
heats it softens it stirs it together
without ever melting it and we just run
all the way down the length of the
barrel and that's how we join them
together and we get a stronger part in a
lighter rocket but do you do that on
both sides I guess my question is do you
have a tool on the outside yes yeah yeah
you have to react against something so
there is such a thing as a self reaction
friction stir well and I'll show you
that too okay but for these parts yeah
you have to react it against so you
don't just push the material through
gotcha so now we're gonna look at a
different friction stir welding process
called circumferential because we're
gonna attach a dome or a barrel
self-reacting friction stir welding well
we don't have to have something holding
the part up from behind it seems like
that would be difficult though because
like when you have a hammer and you're
hitting something on an anvil you know
it squishes and molds the metal together
against the anvil right but if you're
just pushing how does it have to push
out the other side well it has to do
with how we fixture it and some very
clever things and the friction-stir weld
head which is why I'm not gonna let you
film it I can't okay you cannot look at
that part at the end of this big
assembly of course yeah yeah this guy
right up here so that part I can't look
at don't look at that okay got it
well video man we're taking your card
this is why your it seems like you would
be more prone to fracture on the
backside you are there is some tricks
and techniques to making this work well
especially a self reacting process like
this one where you don't have any
support to you know protect that joint
and what's the advantage of doing that
you can you
seal the tank it's like when you sew a
pillow together that last stitch is
important but you have to do it from
outside the pillow one of the things
that we have to deal with is when you
come around because of the way that head
works you actually leave a terminal hole
so where you terminate there's a hole
that penetrates the tank that we then
later have to seal up as well but it's
worth doing that because this process is
so fast this tooling here so a big tank
like the tube we just filmed would come
all the way down here where we would
either have a dome or a wren that would
then get the friction-stir weld to put
it all together on the circumference on
the circumference so there's two
different operations there's a
longitudinal friction-stir weld and
there's a circumferential the exact like
it bridges their world in fact you can
see a dome over there that's being set
up for its its attachment so that's a
smaller tank so would that be oxygen
yeah that's Atlas that's just the dome
that's just the dome attached to its
ring it'll get attached to a big long
barrel gotcha sounds good okay alright
and you there's an x-ray booth to x-ray
joints and then there's also a pressure
booth where small bottles get
pressurized and then outside this
building there's a booth where we put
pressure and fluid in the big tanks to
make sure everything seals just like any
normal kind of pressure vessel process
so you so this is this isn't humans know
how to make pressure vessels so you
build it you weld it you seal it and
then you take it up to a certain
pressure above what you think it's going
to see and and that tests it and then
you come back down and then you fly you
got it after the Boosters assemble the
plumbing is installed the insulation is
applied as necessary and the rocket
engines are mounted we were unable to
film details about the engines
themselves but they're made off-site by
a variety of different sources it's
really interesting
being able to peek inside and see the
ISO grid and understand where we started
with the plate that's pretty fascinating
alright so we built the booster now
we're going to talk about the second
stage
of that rocket okay a part that goes to
space so the technology we had before
that we walk through was aluminum rigid
structures very high performance but on
a booster you know you could afford
seven kilograms of inert mass before it
cost you a kilogram of spacecraft on the
upper stage is literally one-to-one so
we switch to an even higher performance
technology so now we're gonna walk the
Centaur line our very high performance
upper stage we use stainless steel oats
it to be clear the centaur is like it's
like the tractor it's the it's the
heartbeat of American space kind of
right yeah yeah so it is in fact the
highest performance upper stage ever
flown it is the last stage of the rocket
that takes the spacecraft all the way
into space and to its destination orbit
gotcha okay all right so this is a Gore
and these are kind of fun these are
going to be resistance welding you can't
friction-stir weld them because the
material is too thin
then shaped into a dome and you can
touch this if you want Dustin
that's it oh my goodness and that's a
pressure vessel that's a pressure vessel
and it's gonna be huge
okay I had no idea that I'd be over
three meters in diameter 40 feet long so
I can just tell you this like I've done
the math to say if I have a certain
thickness pressure vessel it'll be this
much weight but it's a totally different
thing to actually feel it oh yeah it's
like it's just nothing it's nothing
that's in there nothing there it's
amazing okay I can have the thickness of
the dime
okay yeah
you put these together in a sphere we'll
put those together in a dome and then
there'll be a cylindrical section it's
almost 40 feet long and then another
dome on the bottom so this stuff comes
in in big coil rolls almost like you
would buy sheet steel you know at Home
Depot or something and then we stretch
it and we cut it into those shapes and
even as thin as that is we'll actually
machine it still kind of honing it to
get even just a little bit thinner than
we can buy it so these are sharp edges
so be careful
then it came off a big role and we've
laid it out we cut it it's all stainless
steel so these are are they called
mandrel sort now not mandrels what are
these called
these are dies CS so these are dies and
they're going to be used to stretch it
and cut it for those Gore shapes that
you saw for a dome that really gives you
a sense of how little material and the
margins you're playing with here yeah
and then we didn't talk about it but the
five meter composite payload fairing for
Atlas used to be made in Switzerland by
a company called roulade they're gonna
make the app are the the Vulcan 5 meter
payload fairing and so I asked them this
is another one of those strategic
business partnerships to take their
factory out of Switzerland and it's
actually on the other side of that wall
really so you brought the factory to
America brought the factory to America
and there was enough volume there that
they were totally on board yeah one of
the strategies for having a very
successful first flight on Vulcan is to
fly it before you fly it with parts from
Atlas you got it so lots of the
technologies on Vulcan could be flown on
Atlas then so we'll slowly start
bringing them into Atlas over the next
year we'll fly Vulcan payload fairing x'
on atlas we'll fly a lot of the same
technology you just saw pretty much
everything but the be4 engine will have
flown on Atlas at least once before we
try it out on Vulcan gotcha I noticed
you have pictures of the commercial crew
all over the walls here yes yeah so
we're flying people that's a whole
nother game you know 135 in a row is you
know is we're very proud of that but
when it's a person up there when you can
shake hands with the payload
you know talk to them and meet their you
know friends and relatives it's a whole
other thing and so they've been to the
factory many times to see their rocket
and it means a lot to my employees to
know them and to know that we're flying
people and so we're just that much more
careful then we have pictures of them
everywhere to sort of remind us you know
that sunny
that's Sunday's and Snickers yeah it
really is yeah here is sort of the
completed product stainless steel you
see it still just look I didn't ask I'm
allowed to touch right you can touch it
yeah okay okay is that is that machined
after it's welded before before yeah we
can see make a groove maybe
yeah and we actually claim the whole
surface so as thin as that was what you
saw over there
we actually plane it and thin it out
just a little bit more we wanted a
little thinner than you can buy it
really the cool thing about centaur is
you know a booster is typically 80% mass
fraction and most upper stages get 85
ish Centaurs around 90 so literally the
highest performance upper stage ever
okay so we saw the dome that's the
cylindrical tank that that dome will be
fitted to one on the top one on the
bottom and then one on the bottom is
where the engine will be is it's the
same thickness metal it was yeah so that
giant thing you're looking at 40 feet
long half the thickness of a dime you
see all the rings that's all tooling so
that we can support that shape so it
doesn't just collapse on its own then
when we actually put the domes on it
we'll have to grab it at either end and
stretch it or pressurize it depending on
where it is in the factory okay so it's
the it's the opposite of a buckling
problem it's it's a yep hoop stress and
you have ring stress ring stress is the
issue here exactly okay exactly is it
wait am I saying it right
ACCI okay so you have axial stress and
you have ring stress ring stress and
problem sure you could think of it as a
longitudinal bucking problem if you want
because the weight of the structure
itself would overcome the stiffness and
it would start with a hoop and it would
just kind of buckle like this on the top
and fold in gotcha awesome but we have
the same
I know so this material is so thin that
you cannot friction-stir weld it so this
is all done with resistance arc welding
instead in on centaur 3 which is what we
fly in Atlas today this is a
labor-intensive operation 180,000 welds
they're all setup by hand so it takes
many many hours and quite a bit of time
to build this sort of Ferrari of an
upper stage yeah Vulcan will be robotic
and automated really that's amazing
dome on the front dome on the back take
the engine well there's not a dome on
the back that's where the engine goes so
they'll actually be a dome so that you
have a sump to collect propellant in to
draw it into the engine so you don't
waste as much propellant and what you
can't see on the inside is a bulkhead to
separate the liquid oxygen and liquid
hydrogen from one another
got it so where are the engines after
they here
let's see have we got an ro ten open out
of a crate that we can show him okay oh
yeah so we're gonna we're gonna so
there's a final assembly that gets done
in a clean room okay and that's the best
place so we'll look down you'll see a
whole bunch of them they'll be engines
that'll be better okay so this is the
final assembly area for centaur this is
a clean room that's why we're up here
the people down there who are on break
right now would be in bunny suits so
you're looking at the business end those
red covers here on the bottom of the
nozzle of the rl10 rocket engine and you
can see that you have a standard
configured one with a single engine
right there right there but to its left
you see a dual okay that's that's
strange that centaur will carry
astronauts to space that one will that
one will that's amazing
yeah that's pretty big deal so so how do
you I mean that that changes everything
about how you you operate the thing have
you ever flown a dual engine sorry we
have but it's been decades really and so
this is reintroducing a kind of a
historic but one you know configuration
we haven't done recently said this right
here I'm seeing that's Mars 2020 right
there yeah so that's going that's the
Centaur that's gonna take Mars 2020 yes
it is yes it is so you do the bulk of
the heavy lift or the I guess the far
plus you could say with centaur we do
yeah so the Boosters job is to get you
into space typically depending on the
payload but typically you're not quite
orbital at the end of first stage burn
and then centaur will take you orbital
bring you to your parking orbit and then
once you're lined up correctly with you
know the right sort of argument of
perigee then it will send you off on the
final burns to get you lined up for
wherever you're going in this case its
interplanetary missions who are going
out to Mars
so the brains that drives the Centaur
where is that are you integrating GNC at
this point we are so on the back end of
that is a flight controls computer
you know inertial measurement sensor and
other sensors rate sensors that are the
guidance system they're always attached
to the upper stage obviously because if
you attached him to the booster and
separated you would have lost your
brains so they're always up here okay
final assembly yes yeah so this is this
is the big show
right this is a big show we call this
the Great Hall of Rockettes because as
you can see there's Rockettes way down
there and they just keep going all the
way to that big roll-up door and as they
got your earring final assembly and when
they get to that door they roll outside
down to the rocket ship and off to the
launch pad so so this gentleman over
here is doing final assembly on a rocket
he is absolutely doing that yes he is
that's amazing
and so well just having a person for
scale is pretty impressive there yep
that's amazing so what are we looking at
these are these are deltas on this side
of the aisle then atlases on this side
then way down there we'll walk you back
down there but Vulcan we'll start at the
far end of the Delta line and slowly
work its way down eventually replacing
Delta entirely so so Delta and Atlas are
being phased out yes yes so do you know
the number of missions you have left for
each one I do okay are you allowed to
talk about it no okay so the last
question I asked Tori was very
interesting and before I show you that
though I want to say you should be
following this guy on Twitter he has a
legitimate technical engineering answer
for everything he's asked he's very
engaged in the space community it is
legitimately fun to watch Tori Bruno
interact on Twitter so there's that now
if you're into space you know that I
didn't ask two things in this video I
didn't talk about engines very much and
I also didn't ask about Tori Bruno's
competitors I did that that's over on
the second channel he gave me really
good answers if you want to hear what
Tori Bruno thinks about those two things
go to the second channel link in the
video description also a link to Tori
Bruno's Twitter okay let's get back to
the last question I asked Tori on this
tour I have noticed that there's not a
lot of stuff in this plant that's going
to lower the orbit that's correct and
that's intentional
yes our specialty or the higher energy
more difficult orbits things like Mars
pterri mission right and that's
literally right there yeah but but we
don't call it Mars 2020 here what do you
call it we call it Mars 2020 20 why
would you do that because it's our 20th
trip to Mars really mm-hmm that's
amazing
that's impressive and so your job is to
get it there yes and then what happens
with the payload at that point so it'll
reenter it'll come down to the surface
of Mars as you mentioned it's a rover we
really set it on its way so centaur is
not going to go all the way with it to
Mars we're gonna put that energy in as
an escape velocity here at Earth you
know greater than one c3 as we say in
the technical world and then that will
carry it all the rest of the way it will
establish its own orbit in land that's
impressive
that's what I like about Tori he knows
his stuff so thank you very much for
this tour in this business you're
welcome absolutely incredible yeah I've
lived near this plant my entire life
well I guess it hasn't been here my
entire life but as long as it's been
here I've lived near this plant and
always wanted to come inside so thank
you very much for extending your flight
and giving us this tour this was amazing
I'm glad you came by thank you so much
you bet SuperDuper thank you for
watching this video it's a long video
but it's so special I mean I've loved
Rockets forever always have always will
and this is like rockets and
manufacturing the Venn diagram right
there that sweet spot this is what this
is for me it's wonderful so thank you
for watching this video if you feel like
this type of video earned your
subscription one way you can signal that
to me is by subscribing you can click on
the subscribe button and there's a
little notification bell if you click
that it'll notify you when I upload and
that'll encourage me to do more stuff
like this big thanks to ula and Torrey
Bruno you trusted me with your rocket
factory so thank you very much also you
can support on patreon if you're into
that sort of thing I've got something
coming up in the in the near term that
the patrons have made happen and is
fantastic audible.com slash smarter or
text the word smarter to 500 500 I
recommend 7 Eve's or mary robinette book
the calculating stars yeah that's about
it I'm just really happy and very
grateful and thank you for being here
with me that's it
I'm Destin you're getting smarter every
day have a good one
bye